So to start looking at device software, let's look at Amazon FreeRTOS.
Amazon FreeRTOS is an operating system for microcontrollers that makes small,
low-power edge devices easy to program, deploy,
secure, connect, and manage.
Now this comes directly from Amazon's own documentation.
But what's so special about microcontrollers that makes us need an
entirely separate operating system for them?
Well, before we talk about that specifically,
let's take a look at what's actually going on with microcontrollers generally.
Now in 2018 there were 23 billion IoT devices in operation,
and also in 2018, there were 30.5 billion microcontrollers sold.
Over in 2022, there are forecasted to be 43.7 billion microcontrollers sold,
and in 2025, there are expected to be 75 billion IoT devices in operation.
So these microcontrollers are growing along exponential lines in the
same way that IoT itself is growing exponentially.
Now what are some of the challenges you face when you're using
these microcontrollers that makes them have special requirements
for the operating systems that they use?
Well one of the first ones is that there's a limited amount of storage space.
Now this means that there's smaller amounts of actual capacity on the
microcontrollers to store things like files or programs that they run.
Now in addition to that, there's a smaller amount of memory,
not just the hard drive space you might think of on your own machine,
but also the RAM that it's actually going to use when
it's running different programs.
So it doesn't have as much of that available.
And finally,
there's also a limited functionality and it can be hard to program
effectively with the restraints that are placed by the storage space in
memory because you don't get many of the same tools,
libraries,
and other things that you might get in other operating system environments.
So what's the relationship between Amazon FreeRTOS and microcontrollers?
Well, before FreeRTOS was acquired by Amazon,
FreeRTOS was the leading Real-Time Operating System,
RTOS, for microcontrollers.
It was used when you needed to put an operating system on a tiny
device that couldn't fit the full Android,
Linux or Windows operating system.
And this meant that it was useful when you had devices that had
between 10 kB and 100 kB of data memory and potentially between
100 kB and 0.5 MB of storage.
Now it not only fit these needs,
but it went head and actually did other things too.
It created an entire ecosystem of the FreeRTOS community that had support,
libraries,
and carefully-managed intellectual property and licensing
so that many different organizations and companies were
able to effectively use this.
Furthermore,
Amazon FreeRTOS also has connectivity libraries that
allows it to use things like Wi-Fi, Ethernet,
and Bluetooth Low Energy.
Additionally, it has added functionality that supports things like MQTT messages,
adds additional security features,
and allows for updates of software on Amazon FreeRTOS devices,
as well as effectively integrating with other local devices.
Now let's go ahead and visualize Amazon FreeRTOS and how it
works inside of a real world scenario.
Well, we might start with a microcontroller that has Amazon FreeRTOS installed.
Now it's going to be able to take advantage of some libraries,
like connectivity libraries, for Bluetooth Low Energy or Wi-Fi,
and that might allow it to connect to something like
a router using the Wi-Fi library.
You could also take advantage of other libraries on the Amazon FreeRTOS device,
like the Device Defender library,
which could ship bits of information over to the AWS cloud.
Now that might actually integrate with the Device Defender
in the AWS cloud and allow you to monitor your
microcontroller devices more effectively.
But there's lots of other things in here too.
There're libraries for interacting with the shadows of devices,
which I'll talk more about in later sections,
but that effectively allows you to send updates about the state
of a device into the AWS cloud and then retrieve those states
later on and update them further.
Now you can also use MQTT libraries and connectivity
libraries to send updates over to the AWS cloud and interact
with something like the Message Broker,
or even do things like over-the-air updates,
which would allow you to interact with an AWS service to update the
software on the microcontroller with Amazon FreeRTOS.
Now in addition to just these few libraries that are included,
there's also other libraries that allow you to do
other things with Amazon FreeRTOS.
So with all of this functionality and the integrations
that you can make with the AWS cloud,
what are some of the benefits of Amazon FreeRTOS?
One of the first ones is that it enables connectivity
easily to Amazon Greengrass or the IoT Core.
Now we'll talk more about Greengrass later on,
but the IoT Core is essentially all the functionality inside the
AWS cloud that integrates with IoT devices.
It'll also allow us to do things like increase security from TLS support,
it'll also do things like key management,
so allowing us to create and rotate and effectively store keys in safe ways,
and deal with encryption when we're sending messages
to and from the different areas.
Now also, we're going to be able to add multithreading on these local devices.
Now what this basically means is that we can have some management tasks
that are automated by Amazon FreeRTOS itself to free up developer time so
that they can focus on the actual important functionality that they're
writing for their applications and not have to deal with many of these
overhead management tasks.
So hopefully this gives you a high level understanding of Amazon FreeRTOS and some of the features and benefits that it offers.